what is consciousness subjective
experience think of it like the inner
movie of the mind it's a movie but it's
got images and sounds like a regular
movie but it's got sensations of your
body it's got emotions it's got thinking
all running through this inner
soundtrack of your mind you've coined
the from philosophical zombies this is a
philosophical thought experiment about a
creature which is as much like us as
possible but lacks Consciousness
entirely I think therefore I
brains AI systems are getting very very
close to passing the touring test 50
years ago they already said it passed
the touring test and then move the goal
lines one radical view is to say there
actually is no such thing as
Consciousness it's all an illusion
generated by the brain I'm in that camp
maybe we're all dancing around something
that doesn't really exist mhm
[Music]
this is Star Talk special edition Neil
degrass Tyson your personal
astrophysicist I got with me Chuck KN
Chuck baby hey what's happening all
right all right how you doing sir I'm
good thank you Gary O'Reilly yeah thank
you and love to have you as my co-host
here it's pleasure yeah we're doing yet
another episode on consciousness yeah
when will we be done when we know what
we need to know okay and so this could
be going on for a while I mean it's not
just Consciousness is consciousness and
reality and and our understanding and
interpretation of reality filtered
through our Consciousness totally so
what shows did you cook up today all
right so we're heading for Inner Space
rather than outer space Inner Space I
love it and Consciousness as we've just
discussed we continually think of it as
I suppose a precious entity um we feel
like we're above others on the planet
other beings yes say that to your cat I
was going to say oh don't don't don't
start me on cattitude please don't go
there yeah we think we're in charge of
the cats it's the opposite I mean for
hundreds and thousands of years the
greatest thinkers have grappled with it
they've grappled with each other as
regards to explaining it there are
handful of theories in existence but
apparently it's a hard problem um which
is a clue so what is consciousness what
makes it once we've conquered that
particular Mountain we will dive down a
rabbit hole of simulation Theory
Singularity and virtual reality it's
going to be fun and to join us we have
professor of philosophy and Neuroscience
at NYU he is an Australian philosopher
and cognitive scientist also an author
reality plus and the conscious mind are
two of his many books he gave us phrases
the hard problem of consciousness and
philosophical zombies along the way uh
please David Charmers David welcome back
to Star talk and you're just down the
street at NYU New York University just
right up here on the sea
train welcome Simplicity welcome now why
do we need you to say that Consciousness
is a hard problem isn't that just
obvious so what why do we need a a
decorated professor of the field to
assert that totally obvious and when I
when I first said this I just said okay
well this is just giving the thing a
labels that uh everybody knows but who
was to Guess that the uh the label would
would catch on sometimes it's just uh
helpful to uh to say the obvious
actually you know the idea that
Consciousness POS poses a hard problem
we were talking about Newton before the
show you can actually find it in uh in
Newton at one point he says the way that
colors mix optically and produce a
certain experience is not so easy this
is uh this he says it's not so easy e a
s i e and he says it's you know the way
that all we understand this stuff
objectively and say how the brain
processes visual inputs but then it
gives you the experience of a color that
amazing pink shirt yeah go Coral say yes
magenta yeah where do where does where
does that experience of pink come from
as newon said not so easy King Salmon
not not form raised King Salmon me is
kind of King s right wild for C wild C
reduce me to food stuff where does the
experience of king salmon come from
Envision that is what Newton said not so
easy okay so David had you instead
called it the easy problem of
Consciousness maybe we would have all
figured it out by now but well the easy
problems were the problems of things you
do like people respond what they say I
can say so what is consciousness put it
on the table subjective experience
Consciousness is anything you experience
directly from the first person point of
view I think of it like the inner movie
of the mind it's a movie but it's got
images and sounds like a regular movie
but it's got sensations of your body
it's got smell it's got taste it's got
emotions it's got thinking all running
through this inner soundtrack of your
mind and that allows your Consciousness
to be distinct and unique from others
because the world as you receive it will
could be very different from how someone
else receives that very same world
sounds like a
problem sounds like a problem to me is
this where biases coming in the terms of
how you receive and accept then
information that comes to we all
experience it subjectively in a
different way some things may be in
common maybe when we look at uh an image
the shape maybe you know our experience
of that rectangle might be the same but
the emotions that it brings on maybe
totally different for me and for you now
suppose we're running that same input
through a measurement device and then
the device comes up with a conclusion
and no matter how you put the
information through it reaches the same
conclusion yet somehow when we look at
it we see something different who do you
trust then the person or the device I
don't know if the device is like
specialized it's a thermometer it says
it says 79 I'm going I'm going with the
device I'm going with the device too I'm
just we're sitting together here I get
this but I'm going with the device okay
me too it's like you tell me it's 79 no
I'm going to trust a thermometer there's
a famous quote no science achieves
maturity without a system of measurement
ooh and we do not have the measurement
system for Consciousness actually which
renders it immature scientifically
relative to other fields where you have
Petri dishes and methods and tools so
you have a hard
problem how about that oh my God just
Pro that was oh my God I just I walked
into that didn't I you know years ago I
went along to a conference and told told
everyone that i' had invented a
measuring device for Consciousness the
uh the Consciousness meter made with a
combination of uh neuromorphic
engineering transpersonal psychology and
quantum gravity and then I pulled out my
uh my Consciousness meter and it looked
kind of like a haird
dryer that was where we were back in the
90s yeah I would have called I would
have called on your second half
of that first sentence it sounded like
word sell so I applaud you sir so where
abouts bra ectoplasmic meter yeah
ectoplasms yeah so whereabouts in the
brain do you think we are fermenting
this Consciousness well this is one of
the big debates which is going on what
are the neural correlates of
Consciousness which is the bit of the
brain which is active in a way which is
most directly connected to your
Consciousness and there's actually even
among neuroscientists there's a very
Lively debate between people who think
it's in the say for visual Consciousness
people who think it's in the sensory
areas toward back of the bra visual
cortex back there or prefrontal cortex
front of the brain the areas Associated
more with thinking and judgment a
question what's the difference between
your prefrontal cortex and your frontal
cortex uh frontal cortex goes a uh is a
little bit more it's a little less front
than the prefrontal CeX see it's less
front it's a little less front than the
prefrontal
CeX okay when we look at brain
structures compared among other animals
let's say mammals to keep it in the
family
presumably we have a bigger frontal
cortex than other mammals and we can see
what's going on in that and thereby
decide that we have certain capacity for
thought that other animals do not is
that a fair yeah and people who put
Consciousness in prefrontal cortex are
probably going to say that Consciousness
is not so widespread in the animal
kingom whereas people who think it's in
the sensory coures we get those
throughout the Animal Kingdom so maybe
much you know like is a fish conscious
well you know fish don't have any kind
of develop prefrontal cortex yeah I'm
going to say uh judging from the look in
their
eyes I'm I'm GNA go out on a limb and
say
no they know when a shark's around right
well that's true well I have a question
can you tell me what creates
Consciousness is it
emergent in our genetic code I mean
emergent in
the Evo bio sense where you have an
organism that has certain properties but
only either on mass with other animals
like flocking of birds or some other
feature that was not really intended it
just emerged from other features that
were necessary for survival so is
consciousness emergent or do you think
it specifically evolved oo it's in some
sense emergent I mean this word
emergence gets used in so many different
ways and sometimes it's like magic word
it's like I don't really understand it
we don't know
I like magic words give me my magic word
for the day in some sense Consciousness
clearly emerges from the brain you get a
a brain that develops and Consciousness
comes along as the brain develops
Consciousness gets more and more complex
so there's some kind of connection there
but can we tell a story about how
Consciousness was selected for in
evolution no one has a good answer to
that right now there are ideas out there
yeah we needed Consciousness for control
for decision making
for reflection but so far no one has
told a good story about why you need to
have Consciousness to do those things
why couldn't a big complicated computer
do that without Consciousness is it
really Consciousness or are we talking
about levels of consciousness because I
think that you know there are definitely
animals that have Consciousness I mean a
dog for instance it you see it has
emotion you see that it has a reaction
to sensory data just like we do you see
that it responds
to commands and pain and everything but
you look at a baby and if you didn't
know any if you never saw a baby before
and you saw this thing this glob of
human thing just sitting
there like making these crazy faces has
no control of its limbs or you wouldn't
necessarily say well that's a conscious
thing it's actually thinking about
anything you you know but you are
totally right there are levels of
consciousness in in babies and we're
still arguing about what they are I mean
a long time ago people uh used to not
give anesthetics to babies when they
were getting circumcised because they
thought they couldn't feel pain tell me
about it no I'm
joking I remember that day well sir
these days we think babies feel pain and
we think they can have some basic visual
experience actually my wife who works on
this stuff Claudia pasos is a leading
expert on Consciousness and infant
there's still an argument like can a
baby have the experience of thinking
right of deciding of agent
the general moral from what I can tell
for the last few years is babies are a
whole lot more sophisticated than we
thought they were David isn't that true
for every single animal that we've
studied in more depth than in the past
we are recovering greater levels of
neuro complexity in their conduct
behavior that any previous generation
thought is that true for every animal
yeah this is absolutely the trend to say
over the years we have thought more and
more animals are more and more
cognitively complex as to the question
of whether they're conscious we used to
think okay humans a few primates you
know monkeys Apes these days it's like
pretty much every mammal probably Birds
probably reptiles arguing about fish and
octopus it sounds like we're clawing our
way out of our own out of our own
ego but the singularity of our presence
in the animal kingdom is is being
challenged by further research into the
conduct of animals you've seen that
YouTube video of the magpie
bird where it's got the container of
water that's filled up to the top and it
drinks the water until it can't the beak
can't reach the water anymore it walks
away comes back with a pebble drops the
pebble in ra raises the level and then
it drinks and it does that three or four
times so it has a clear understanding of
volume displacement it has a clear
understanding of archimedian
principles but go back to Chuck's point
about levels of of Consciousness when we
sleep yeah when we're unconscious when
we're in a coma and if you put us under
general
anesthetic do we not have varying levels
of consciousness at different times the
idea behind an anesthetic is to wipe out
Consciousness completely but very hard
to test whether it absolutely does this
at one point in the 1970s for example
people uh put some kind of a rubber band
around the arm so so the anesthetic
didn't make it that far and then they
said if you hear me please move your
hand and what do you know the hand could
move so then it's like that kind of
anesthetic was maybe working partly just
to paralyze you these days okay they
they work a lot harder to knock out not
just not just action not just uh but
pain and awareness but it's hard to know
that it's gone for sure even when when
we're asleep When We're Dreaming there's
certainly a level of Consciousness
absolutely of Consciousness there isn't
our Consciousness altered in our dreams
a different state of consciousness for
sure psychedelics they alter your
Consciousness meditation it alers your
consciousness absolutely to yeah I'm so
glad we have science to obtain an
objective reality of the
world if it all depend on the human
brain forget it we'd still be in the
caves did I just insult your entire
field no it's okay okay but uh you know
we we can study what's different in the
brain in these different states of
Consciousness and that is one of the
most exciting advances over the last 30
years I mean psychedelics used to just
be oh my God it's all just you know
right
mystical now now we can actually see
what's happening in the brain when you
psychedelic so David you published a
paper recently on AI and Consciousness
what was that yeah I got invited to give
a uh give a talk actually to all the AI
people at their big annual conference on
this controversial issue of whether
current AI systems could be conscious I
called it could a large language model
be conscious and I argued that even Lang
model like exactly yeah and I argued
probably they're not conscious right now
but give it 10 years and they may well
be yeah or they're conscious right now
and they're just not letting us know
yeah good strategy just waiting to take
over waiting to take it over babe what
are we if we don't have Consciousness
but we're still doing and being and
you've coined the frame philosophical
zombies is that what that's leing I
think therefore I
brains this is a philosophical thought
experiment about a creature which is as
much like us as possible but lacks
conscious
entirely not quite like the zombies in
the Hollywood movies you know they they
behave quite unlike us and you know
maybe they even have somec conscious
experiences when they eat their victim's
brains I love the taste of those brains
but so the the philosophical zombie one
way to think about this is just say you
had a computer simulation of your brain
right in your body and maybe behaving
just like you would it be conscious it's
not obvious many people think that such
a creature would have no conscious
experience at all that kind of is a way
to it's a hypothetical thought
experiment but what it does is raises
the question why aren't we zombies right
Evolution produced US based on all the
smart and sophisticated things we can do
why couldn't Evolution just have
produced philosophical zombies that act
like us well we actually have we have
produced the zombies the way you're
talking about in AI when you you you can
speak to an AI now via computer like you
know you don't know you're talking to an
actual computer and it will speak to you
as if it were a person you would not
know that the thing you're talking to
doesn't have well that's the Turing test
right precisely the touring AI systems
are getting very very close to passing
that touring test by the way 50 years
ago they already set it past the touring
test and then move the goal lines so the
goal lines have been systematically
getting moved to greater and greater
complexity before anyone decides that AI
has achieved Consciousness but it would
have blown away Allan Turing even the
first round because I'm old enough we're
about maybe the same age is Eliza you
remember Eliza was one of the first
computer programs that understood
language simulated a psychotherapist yes
yeah basically uh you're therapist do
you type in the commands there was no
audio back then so you just type it in
uh say hi Eliza uh how are you I'm fine
tell me about yourself well you know I
left home you know five years ago tell
me about your parents so so Eliza would
come back to you with these questions to
get you to loosen up and talk about your
psychological State like like a real
therapist like like a real therapist
Joseph weisen bam who invented Eliza The
Story Goes that his secretary talked to
Eliza over her lunch break and at the
end of it said this is the first person
who's ever really understood me wow oh
no wow she she she needed more
friends you're on record of saying the
language AI will probably gain
Consciousness within 10 years is that
shrinking that timeline it is as the the
doing more and more impressive things I
mean what is it about it that does not
count as Consciousness today that you're
waiting for it to do in the future again
I'm tracking the goal lines that are
continually moved forward so tell me
it's very close at least to passing the
touring test they've done some actual
versions of the churing test just five
minute versions and people take some
versions of gbg4 to be human more than
50% of the time so getting close to
passing a churing test that's Behavior I
think we're still looking for a cple
couple of things in the uh internal
dynamics of whether it can beat us at
Jeopardy and go and chess oh it already
did that we do move the goalpost I tell
you you're constantly moving the
goalpost admit it I did my PhD in AI lab
30 years ago if you told us then we
would have systems that can carry on a
conversation like this we say conscious
for sure that's what I'm saying please
don't
hit he's just letting me know that I'm
conscious tell me about these goalposts
what new goal line is not yet reached I
think people look at the internal
processes in these current AI systems
they say do they have what goes along
with Consciousness in a human for humans
we think for example feedback processing
is super important for Consciousness to
get some kind of reflection on your on
your earlier States and so on right now
language models all feed forward yeah
introspection for example is memory even
any home of memory would require
basically feedback these language models
are essentially feed forward systems
information gets passed from input to
Output doesn't circulate back very much
it doesn't need to circulate because it
has access to all knowledge so so so it
has Bast even that is a need so now you
can't fault it for not needing what you
need what we need to declare ourselves
conscious when it doesn't even need that
but people say that at least opens up
the possibility now that since it's
doing it in a way which is UN like the
way that we do it and that we are the
one case we know of humans are the one
case we know of that are conscious then
maybe this could be doing in a
sufficiently different way that it's a
philosophical zombie we are right now
The Benchmark for Consciousness because
humans are the only system we know okay
so you can call it philosophical zombie
rather than a higher Consciousness
entity and where does perception come
into this because that's where we kind
of started come computers don't perceive
they actually observe so like even if we
did have all the knowledge in the world
capable of running through our brains
each one of us would experience that
differently based on the perceptions
that we have of who we are our
relationship to the world and our
relationship to the information that
we're receiving I declare that we think
of I don't want to speak for you but
typically we speak of Consciousness as a
feature not a bug of human existence a
feature and so something to be praised
that other animals do not have and in
the example you're giving AI is not
susceptible to perception correct why do
we now deny it a yet higher level of
Consciousness and say yeah it it's got
us beat you're saying that that's a
benefit that to be in a position I don't
want to say oh you're still not
conscious because you're not susceptible
to errors of interpretation as we are
back in my office here I have a a
replica of vano staring night yes so if
van go himself had been AI it would have
been an exact representation of the
scene in front of him in 1889 right okay
and it's not right it's what that scene
felt like to him right so I'll give you
that AI is not going to do that unless
we tell it right and that's my point we
can train it on Van go and it can give
you all the all the van go you then it
is an exact representation of Van go he
wouldn't have made that out a whole
cloth yeah can we infer Consciousness on
AI until we absolutely know how to
define consciousness itself thank you
and to have some kind of operational
Criterion the funny thing is our best
operational Criterion for Consciousness
in humans at least is verbal report
right to know whether someone's
conscious you ask them to know what
they're conscious of you ask them I
think I'm think yeah therefore I am but
in our AI system the current AI systems
unfortunately this has become useless as
a Criterion because yeah sure they will
tell you that for a while they were all
going around saying they were conscious
and then for a while the tech companies
made sure they didn't say that so they I
am a language model
from anyway this is now just a function
of how they're trained so Neil tells us
everything is mathematics yeah so are we
going to find oursel with a t-shirt
equation that can solve Consciousness I
mean for a lot of people this is one of
the potential holy Grails here finding
laws of Consciousness so simple we could
write them on the front of a T-shirt and
maybe with some beautiful mathematical
we've had Einstein give us the theory of
relativity and change the way we see the
universe right and things within it
Penrose has gone into quantum mechanics
with this orc o theory of his how was
Roger Penrose a
theoretical astrophysicist how was he
received in your community when he
published his book on Consciousness
linking it to the quantum well it was
very helpful in some ways it got a lot
of very smart people interested in
Consciousness because it to Anchor it in
laws of physics yeah yeah his approach
was to bring in quantum mechanics and
furthermore non-standard quantum
mechanics non-algorithmic versions of
quantum mechanics that went Way Beyond
what was you know consensus even in
physics then he combined it with some
complicated biology like the biology of
microtubules in the walls of neurons
very controversial in Neuroscience so I
would say look it's creative it's
brilliant because it's Penrose but it's
totally speculative totally
controversial and ultimately not well
received by neuroscientists but you know
the neuroscientist because he's an
outsider but because they actually did a
legitimate analysis it they said that
you know microtubules your average
neuroscientist I don't I don't know what
a microt tual is it's something inside
the the cell wall of a neuron a micr
Roger
pen dude I even I know this for Quantum
Computing in the brain basically oh okay
and this was going to be wave function
collapse and microtubules was going to
be responsible plus I think the
fundamental feature of quantum physics
is the probabilistic nature of the
reality that it underpins and so it it
would allow you even possibly to have a
perception of free will because there's
a
probabilistic firing of neurons right
triggered by this Quantum the wave
function okay so that's as I understood
it I hope I didn't is that the brain is
kind of a prediction machine or is that
just really for Penrose the biggest
thing was he thought that human
mathematicians can do things that no
computer could ever do and he used
girdle's theorem that no formal system
can ever be complete and consistent to
argue for that point and you know he
made a philosophical argument for why we
have to do these special and then he
said there therefore we need new physics
that goes beyond anything computable and
he said let's look to a theory of
quantum gravity and now we're getting to
you know Neil's territory right so uh
girdle girdle uh studied the system of
definitions that comprise math okay okay
okay it turns out it applies to much
more than math if you really think about
it it also applies to keeping your belly
nice and flat sorry that's a different
girle we know that 1+ 1 is 2 and 2+ 2 is
4 and there rules that get you there
okay so you can ask can mathematics be
constructed as a completely
self-consistent set of rules okay where
any rule has a rule before it that is
consistent with the other rules can you
do this and he concluded it's not just
because he pulled it out of his ass he
can show that at some point in
mathematics
you just have to make something up and
declare it to be true and and you have
no ability to prove that it's true okay
you have to assert it and out of that
comes the rest of everything else oh wow
and so that was this was
shocking because something with all the
with the logic of mathematics yeah this
would proves that and this is only true
because I can prove it you keep doing
that all the way down you reach a point
where somebody just sitting there up on
the throne saying this is so
so let it be written so let it be done
exactly that has to happen at some point
for all the rest you know who also did
this you must know this of the color
people okay colored people no I didn't
on the end oh oh I'm sorry there was no
I was going to say what black
mathematician did
this oh so we can say what color is the
gentleman's shirt okay as we've decided
we decided I said it's it's the color of
King salon King Salmon well what color
is the color of king salmon the king
salmon no then you have say it's kind of
like let's say it was bluish you say it
was kind of violet well what color is
violet and then you can go to like the
flower that's violet Violet okay that's
a viol well what color is that right you
keep doing this and you a point where
somebody just has to declare you cannot
reduce it any F cannot reduce it you
just have to declare got to just say
this is it we agree that this is red and
then you take it from there and both
penr and the color people think people
who study that more cleanly we got Chuck
come upside your
ass so you know Pen Rose and the Negro
color people they're decid the vision
scientist who study color oh there you
go and the mathematicians who think
about consistency and completeness both
sometimes end up at this point where
they argue there is something special
about human consciousness human can have
humans can have insights into seeing
that some mathematical theorem is true
Penrose thought in a way that uh no
machine could know the people who study
color say through studying the visual
processes in the brain that process
colors you could study all that and it
still won't tell you what the experience
of the color of king salmon is like that
is something you have to know
subjectively
oh the feeling of that's what they're
saying because the color affects you and
that effect will be different you cannot
know that unless you actually
experience subed by I'm affected by the
blues and the greens in Van Go Star
night okay I I feel those colors you
feel those colors if you just read a
book about it or if you just anything
you read it looked at an image of your
brain processing all this that would not
give you the experience of star night if
it's going to take different thinking
because we've spent thousands of years
thinking in a certain way and if if you
want an an
linear manner what theories are out
there right now that are thinking
differently and are looking like they
might challenge this hard problem you
know there's no consensus on this but
one radical view on the kind of the
reductionist side of the equation is to
say there actually is no such thing as
Consciousness it's all an illusion
generated by the brain our brain makes
us think that we have these special
properties and nothing actually
has them I'm in that camp for no reason
I just I'm just thinking maybe we're all
dancing around something that doesn't
really exist M and then maybe it's like
we want to believe there's this special
thing to make us seem special so what's
driving that is that the sort of
thousand brains theory that Hawkins has
what is that what is that thousand
brains please you're I don't know the
Thousand brains oh it's it's kind of
like a cognitive mechanism Hawkins came
up Jeff Hawkins apparently oh Jeff
Hawkins okay up with a thousand brains
where it's not just one singular brain
that's doing this but the compartments
within the brain I may be doing a
disservice to his theory here probably
am are you talking about the
construction of the brain itself so like
inside your brain are just these
multiple layers of brain and and you
somehow them all they all come together
is what gives you the Consciousness
models within models brain has models of
the brain and it may be a misleading
model of the brain I mean is it this
dark space that this occupying up there
and we shine a light because that's the
thing we need to look at right now
because it's not a Rolodex I know that
for sure so where is it and how is it
and this so does it then exist as we're
thinking well the brain builds very
simple models of the world you know
maybe it models physics of the world
with a folk physics which is way simpar
and different from actual physics you
say folk physics yeah like Common Sense
physics it's like you know Aristotle's
physics things impetus and so on that
may not heavy Things Fall faster than
lighter things because they're heavier I
was about to say some is wrong Aristotle
was kind of stupid yeah
yeah hard he's a smart got hardly any
physic corre no one was going to get it
right the first time in physics if
someone makes a measurement and gets a
result and then someone else makes the
same measurement but gets a different
result and someone gets a different
machine to try to measure the same
phenomenon and they yet get a different
result but everybody thinks there's a
result but none of the results agree
that's usually evidence of no phenomenon
at all
and people are pulling things out of the
noise of the data when there's no
agreement and so what leads me to think
maybe Consciousness doesn't really exist
in any way anyone thinks is because
everybody's idea about Consciousness is
different and does not comport and does
not blend into a greater edifice of an
understanding of Consciousness which
leads me in this example of physics to
possibly think that there there's no
such thing as Consciousness and we're
just dancing around a m pole and the
pole is is not even there let said it's
early days but I also think there is a
core of phenomena on which people agree
on which we have did it coming out of
the Neuroscience is phenomena like you
know blindsight where people can
identify an object without Consciousness
forms of contrast between conscious and
uh unconscious perception experiments on
neural correlates of consciousness the
trouble is the agreement is not yet on
the wild fundamental Theory um yeah
maybe that's not happening for another
50 years or 100 years who's to say but
there's the beginnings of a science
there there are things we can agree on
and the neuroscientists tend to be
conservative about this stuff mostly
they're not the ones writing the book
that says here is my uh here is my
solution to the problem let's build it
up a piece at a time and we'll
eventually get there and in all fairness
you're in a very new field compared to
other branches of science we have the
benefit of six centuries of births of
smart people which includes Galileo who
died the same year Newton was born and
so Newton we had Newton we had Einstein
we have we had the benefit of smart
platforms upon which to build over the
centuries and if you're just all coming
at it now yeah let's let's do our
conservative science and let's also do
some build some speculation on top of it
but let's realize that right now it is
speculation good thank you okay we
speculate that if there is quantum
mechanics in the Consciousness that were
connected to the universe with our
Consciousness with with our wave
functions that is totally a speculation
but these speculations are great to
think about I'm a philosopher I get paid
to speculate so it's like good for youy
you know really think about ideas yeah
they do I don't need to perform any
experiment except for Thought
experiments they pay me for your parents
say he wants to be a philosopher how's
he going to pay his rent thought
experiments I'm a philosopher did you
today
I said did you think about bullshitting
today there's the old joke about the
dean who said you know why the physics
why you more like the math department
all they need is pens papers and trash
canards or he could be like the
philosophy Department all they need is
pens and
paper really good that's a great joke I
love that love so if we detach from
Consciousness Consciousness just for the
moment I go back to dayar only 1650 or
whatever is questioning the reality
outside of
himself and throw it into the future and
ask if reality is reality is not virtual
reality real whatever real may be H
people often use that you have the
latest technology of the day to raise
questions about reality um you know
deart put these questions in terms of
dreaming how can I know that I'm not
dreaming yes right now and then he then
he built the thought experiment of an
evil demon how can I know that an evil
demon isn't producing all these
perceptions of the world as you would at
that time even though none of it is real
these days we ask exactly that same
question by saying basically how do you
know you're not in a virtual reality
right now might you be in The Matrix
could we be in a computer simulation and
suddenly that question is just it's just
kind of a contemporary way of yeah it is
of expressing old question about reality
except I mean let's be honest you can
put a mathematical value on every single
thing in the universe even particles
have we learned I learned they have a
what do you call half up or half down
spin spin up spin charge a m charge a
mass so you can put a mathematical if
you could put a mathematical value on
every single thing you can make a
simulation of every single thing sure
right and in virtual reality right now
you know in the actual virtual reality
systems we have right now they have
complex simulations and models inside
them with with bits that have values let
me pull some philosophy on you if we can
represent reality on a computer in a
virt because we can mathematically map
everything that's going on then
philosophically does the question even
matter oo because at that point you
can't tell theual reality is the reality
so what difference does it make
difference does make me reality is
reality reality is reality no matter
what then then that's I'm sympathetic
with your point but there is a
traditional philosophers response which
goes something like this just say your
spouse was cheating on you and you never
Discover it so you never know the
difference your
life
know you sney no go ahead you never know
so it doesn't affect you at all but a
lot of people want to say man that would
suck that would be really bad even
though I don't know and they have the
same attitude towards virtual reality
even though it seems the same to me my
beliefs about the world are totally
shattered in the same way they would be
by my spouse cheating on me so for those
uh dumpster divers on our podcast uh we
actually interviewed Nick Bostrom one of
the right early advancers of the idea
that we might be living in a Sim he's
one of your people right yeah he's a
philosopher wrote a classic article 2003
basically giving a mathematical argument
that we should take this idea that we're
in a simulation seriously so that was
four years after the movie The Matrix
came out I wonder if that inspired him
is that allow will a philosopher admit
that PO culture influenced their deep I
wrote I wrote an article on this stuff
called The Matrix as metaphysics trying
to they asked me to write an article for
the Matrix website back in the day nice
I wrote something and I think it's one
of my greatest philosophical ideas I
published a book later on that's what
we're about here reality plus all about
culture influencing everything and the
key idea was if we're in The Matrix that
doesn't mean everything we believe is
wrong rather we're living in a it from
bit
Universe we're living in a universe
where the its the table the chairs the
plants the planets are all made of bits
processes in a computational system if
we're in a simulation all of the its are
made of bits which connects to John
Wheeler's famous idea that in physics
the basic its are all the difference is
not the difference the further
clarification is in The Matrix there is
a layered reality because their
Consciousness is contained with in them
just like it is within us but then it's
connected to the Matrix so what you're
saying is if this were a virtual reality
when all of the its would be bits would
just mean that they're all constructed
there is no outside yeah well there the
pure it from bit where the the bits are
the basic level then there's also what I
call the it from bit from it which is
underneath the bits we got where exactly
do I get green eggs and ham in this in
this virtual reality
you go up to the Matrix you find a
computer which is running this
simulation and it's got some bits and
all of its bits are made of like
voltages in a circuit board so it from
bit from it so what is the probability
that we are in a simulation and if we
are are we nothing more than some super
sophisticated ant farm for a young being
somewhere from a a mischievous alien in
in a parents basement programming us up
we school project school project we
school project at a at a is fair in some
distant gy more likely it's a high
powerered scientist who set up a billion
simulations overnight he just left him
running he's going to come back in the
morning gather up the statistics gosh
and time dilation that makes more
sense just ruined it for you ruin cuz
guess what don't shut it down and that
would explain the Multiverse
everything oh my God awful maybe maybe
Hegel once said that the end of history
is when the UN becomes conscious of
itself so in this simulation idea the
moment we realize we're in a simulation
that's when they shut us down right
don't shut us down like the TR
show oh my God that's one of my favorite
episodes of Rick and Morty where you saw
that where he goes to the microverse and
then the microverse they find the Teeny
verse but but one the microverse
actually Powers his car yes I remember
it's inside the battery and he he is
their God he's just for his spaceship
yes yes yes so we spend how much of our
life in virtual reality right now as as
people some people spend you know half
their time there at least in video games
that's one kind of virtual reality are
we not sleep walking into a continuous
virtual reality for some of us I think
it's coming this is what this is what
Mark Zuckerberg wants right the
metaverse renamed this whole company
after and by the way in the metaverse
it's not just a matter of entertainment
in the metaverse you like go to work in
the metaverse
you you do you you meet your friends in
the metaverse like you literally live
your life Your Entertainment Your
Entertainment like yeah right now the
century experience in a virtual reality
isn't 100% complete as we know it how
long before we can taste we can smell we
can have all these other sensory sensory
developments in V reaction I think it's
probably getting there in coming decades
I mean right now the vision and the
hearing are actually pretty good 100%
you but I got an apple vision Pro and
the visual quality is very very very
very high they're now developing
augmented reality glasses like the Orion
ones we're not going to be walking
around with big old headsets on like
that in the future
surely hopefully in the end contact
lenses contct lenses brain computer
interfaces to get to get taste and smell
and touch working it's probably going to
require some direct brain computer
interace got stimulate that part of the
brain body representations directly the
smell areas basically will be that we're
in a simulation and we'll end up being
in going into a simulation in a
simulation yeah we could be uh we may
already be at level 42 and that will
take us down to level 43 so David you
got to take us out of here so where what
should we look forward to well I think
on the reality side we're going to be
getting more and more immersive detailed
forms of reality and the question is
going to arise for us are those
technological realities genuine
realities I want to say eventually yes
and there's also we got this exactly the
same question about Consciousness our
first topic we're going to have ai
systems artificial brains artificial
intelligences and the question is will
those be genuine real consciousnesses
and and and and where they meet is the
notion which has been featured in
multiple films where you upload your
Consciousness brain and a jar to a jar
if we are going to be able to upload our
consciousness is it going to be better
to to upload it into a synthetic
biological intelligence or into a
silicon based intelligence or does that
even matter does that even who cares
maybe it doesn't I mean right now the
best most efficient artificial digital
Technologies we have is the kind is the
Silicon kind uh bi biology we just don't
have the same kind of control over so I
would predict that we'll probably at
least in the short term if we're
uploaded we'll be uploaded onto digital
processes in Silicon if we're in a
virtual reality that will also be a
reality running on digital processors
and silicon but yeah but what ultimately
matters is not what it's made of it's
the
computation it's the bits yeah why
should that even matter I mean you told
someone 30 years ago we have people
walking around with two knees and hips
and they say well it's not biological no
it's metal right they would who cares
you can still run it's just the thinking
that you can't replicate the brain well
they're starting to find that they can
take themselves in replic the one
philosopher wrote wrote a paper on this
years ago called it's not the meat it's
the motion it's not the biology say a
similar saying
not not too unlike it's A50 it's it's a
50 we don't need to know the your
version of it your phone's
ringing all right David thanks for
coming back on Star Talk we need to have
you more often cuz you're a neighbor
first of all this has been yet another
edition of Star Talk special edition
this time with Professor David Chalmer
in your latest book tell me reality plus
all about those questions about reality
and Consciousness reality plus reality
plus there's what's with the there's
paramont plus Disney plus you know I was
originally going to call it reality 2.0
and everyone's like that's 299s 2.0 so
reality plus okay well it's a cliche the
plus plus Disney plus but at least it's
a 2020s cliche and and regular people
can read this yeah it's for anybody okay
um it's about introduction to the great
problems of philosophy through the lands
of Technology nice nice one of you one
of you read the book solve the problems
please all there we go there you go all
right Chuck good to have you pleasure
Neil we're doing it here all right Neil
degrass Tyson here fourar talk as always
I bid you to keep looking up
[Music]